Date: 2024-10-20
Benchmark case: Velocity4.bit2
Solved: done

## Problem

Given the following example:

`«var users=["Alice", "Bob"]»
«var counter=0»
«for user in users»«counter»«counter=counter+1»
«endfor»`

The generated text is:
`

0
1
`

Supporse we change the index starting from 1, by updating with two replacement operations (bulk(replace "0" with "1" at 2, replace "1" with "2" at 4)), suprisingly the backward transformation will fail.

I will show you why by firstly giving the lambdalized ehanced result as follows:

\users.[["\n", 
    \counter. [[
      "\n", 
      loopfront "", 
      \user.[[
        (counter,0), \counter.[[
          "\n",
          separator "",
          \user.[[
            (counter, 1), \counter.[["\n"]] (counter+1, 2)
          ]] "Bob"
        ]] (counter+1, 1)
      ]] "Alice"
      , looprear ""
    ]] (0, 0)
 ]] ["Alice", "Bob"]

 The problem occurs at the inner most lambda application of the counter assignment: \counter.[["\n"]] (counter+1, 2)
 
 At the moment, the environment is updated to { counter -> (2, 2)}  by the second replacement statement.
 While in the body of the inner most lambda applicaiton, there is no occurance of variable counter, current implmentation consider the counter valule unmodifiable which is 2, so for `fuseExp`, it is in the form of: 2 |> {counter -> (2,2)} |- counter +1 ---> {counter -> (2,2)} |- counter + 0, which is wrong.


Let's consider another update operations: Supporse we change the second index to 0 too, by updating with one replacement operation (bulk(replace "1" with "0" at 4)).
The inner most exp's update would be:
2 |> {counter -> (0,0)} |- counter+1 ---> {counter -> (0,0)} |- counter+2 

The wanted one is counter+0, not counter+2.

## One possible solution

In fact, the value on the left of |> before feeding to fuseExp in the environment is {counter -> (2,[])}, which means it is not updated in the body expression of the lambda application. But if we use 2 to udpate the exp counter+1, which adds an inherently knowledge that 2 must be the updated value.

For `DeclareNode`, `AssignNode` and `LambdaAppNode` in PartialAST, add an extra attribute `isBindingUpdated` to mark it is updated or not.
```
export interface xxxNode {
  ...
  binding: Binding;
  isBindingUpdated: boolean;
}
```

During unLambdalization, the attribute `isBindingUpdated` in `LambdaAppNode` converted to one in `DeclareNode` and `AssignNode`.

Since the equality checking of loopitem is after unPartialEvaluation, so the `DeclareNode` and `AssignNode` in CoreAST also contains `isBindingUpdated` attribute.

During merging of loopitems, when checking the equality of loopitem's body by `areLambdaWithExprsEqual`, the function `areTermNodesEqual` checks the lambda body, when its a `decalre` or `assign` node, when any of the two is not updated, then consider they are equal. 
The finaly result always choose the outermost one, i.e the first one of which the result of exp will always be used.